bench/README.md, before:

# FnXML Benchmark Results

Comprehensive benchmarks comparing FnXML parsers against other Elixir/Erlang XML libraries.

## Environment

- **OS**: macOS (Darwin 25.1.0)
- **CPU**: Apple M1
- **Cores**: 8
- **Memory**: 16 GB
- **Elixir**: 1.19.3
- **Erlang**: 28.1.1
- **JIT**: Enabled

## Test Data

| File | Size | Description |
|------|------|-------------|
| small.xml | 757 B | Simple catalog with 2 books |
| medium.xml | 249 KB | 500 items with nested elements |
| large.xml | 1.3 MB | 2500 items with nested elements |

## Parsers Compared

| Parser | Type | Description |
|--------|------|-------------|
| **fast_ex_blk** | Block | FnXML optimized CPS parser (fastest) |
| **ex_blk_parser** | Block | FnXML standard CPS parser |
| **fast_ex_blk_stream** | Stream | FnXML streaming with 64KB chunks |
| **ex_blk_stream** | Stream | FnXML streaming with 64KB chunks |
| **saxy_string** | SAX | External, highly optimized callback parser |
| **saxy_stream** | SAX | External, streaming 64KB chunks |
| **erlsom** | SAX/DOM | External Erlang library, simple_form mode |
| **xmerl** | DOM | Erlang stdlib, full DOM tree |

---

## Parse Speed Comparison (Medium File - 249 KB)

| Parser | Speed (ips) | vs fast_ex_blk | Memory |
|--------|-------------|----------------|--------|
| **fast_ex_blk** | **565** | 1.00x | 2.02 MB |
| saxy_string | 351 | 1.61x slower | 3.89 MB |
| ex_blk_parser | 319 | 1.77x slower | 4.03 MB |
| saxy_stream | 284 | 1.99x slower | 4.03 MB |
| fast_ex_blk_stream | 252 | 2.24x slower | 1.86 MB |
| ex_blk_stream | 180 | 3.13x slower | 4.04 MB |
| erlsom | 154 | 3.67x slower | 17.98 MB |
| xmerl | 55 | 10.35x slower | 86.92 MB |

---

## Memory Usage Comparison (Medium File)

| Parser | Memory | vs fast_ex_blk |
|--------|--------|----------------|
| **fast_ex_blk_stream** | **1.86 MB** | 0.92x (lowest) |
| **fast_ex_blk** | **2.02 MB** | 1.00x |
| saxy_string | 3.89 MB | 1.92x more |
| ex_blk_parser | 4.03 MB | 1.99x more |
| saxy_stream | 4.03 MB | 1.99x more |
| ex_blk_stream | 4.04 MB | 2.00x more |
| erlsom | 17.98 MB | 8.88x more |
| xmerl | 86.92 MB | 42.94x more |

---

## Summary: FnXML vs Competition

| Metric | vs Saxy (string) | vs Saxy (stream) | vs erlsom | vs xmerl |
|--------|------------------|------------------|-----------|----------|
| **Speed** | 1.61x faster | 1.99x faster | 3.67x faster | 10.35x faster |
| **Memory** | 1.92x less | 1.99x less | 8.88x less | 42.94x less |

---

## Architecture

### CPS Recursive Descent Parser

```
XML Input -> Binary Pattern Match -> Emit Event -> Continue
             (single pass)          (accumulate)   (tail-call)
```

Key optimizations:
- **Continuation-passing style**: Tail-call optimized, minimal stack usage
- **Single binary reference**: Uses `binary_part/3` for zero-copy content extraction
- **Position tracking**: Integer offsets instead of creating sub-binary "rest"
- **Guard-based dispatch**: Character classes use guards for efficient branching
- **Mini-block streaming**: Elements spanning chunk boundaries handled efficiently

### Why FnXML is Fast

1. **Zero-copy parsing**: Content extracted via `binary_part/3` references original binary
2. **No intermediate AST**: Events emitted directly without building tree structure
3. **Minimal allocations**: Only event tuples are allocated during parsing
4. **Tail-call optimization**: CPS enables true tail recursion throughout
5. **BEAM-optimized patterns**: Multi-byte patterns like `<!--` matched directly

---

## When to Use Each Parser

| Use Case | Recommended |
|----------|-------------|
| Maximum speed, full document | `FnXML.Legacy.FastExBlkParser.parse(xml)` |
| Minimum memory, large files | `FnXML.Legacy.FastExBlkParser.stream(chunks)` |
| Standard parsing (Edition 5) | `FnXML.Parser.parse(xml)` |
| File streaming | `File.stream!(path, [], 65536) \|> FnXML.Parser.parse()` |

---

## Running Benchmarks

```bash
# Quick benchmark (medium file only)
mix run bench/parse_bench.exs --quick

# Full benchmark (all file sizes)
mix run bench/parse_bench.exs

# Comprehensive comparison (all parsers including legacy)
mix run bench/all_parsers_bench.exs

# By file size
mix run bench/all_parsers_bench.exs --by-size

# Edition 5 variants only
mix run bench/all_parsers_bench.exs --ed5
```

**Note**: The benchmarks compare FnXML's macro-based parser (Edition 4 and Edition 5 variants) against legacy implementations and external libraries.

## Regenerating Test Data

```bash
mix run bench/generate_data.exs
```

Commit message:

Update README with caution on benchmark results
Add cautionary note about benchmark results and comparisons.

bench/README.md, after:

# FnXML Benchmark Results

Take the benchmarks with a big grain of salt.  Mostly this was used to benchmark parser performance from one version to the next.  This was for the FnXML parser only, not including compliance modules, filters, etc.  Comparison to saxy, erlsom, xmerl should be done with your own real world task to see how each performs in that scenario.  Don't use this as your guide.

Comprehensive benchmarks comparing FnXML parsers against other Elixir/Erlang XML libraries.

## Environment

- **OS**: macOS (Darwin 25.1.0)
- **CPU**: Apple M1
- **Cores**: 8
- **Memory**: 16 GB
- **Elixir**: 1.19.3
- **Erlang**: 28.1.1
- **JIT**: Enabled

## Test Data

| File | Size | Description |
|------|------|-------------|
| small.xml | 757 B | Simple catalog with 2 books |
| medium.xml | 249 KB | 500 items with nested elements |
| large.xml | 1.3 MB | 2500 items with nested elements |

## Parsers Compared

| Parser | Type | Description |
|--------|------|-------------|
| **fast_ex_blk** | Block | FnXML optimized CPS parser (fastest) |
| **ex_blk_parser** | Block | FnXML standard CPS parser |
| **fast_ex_blk_stream** | Stream | FnXML streaming with 64KB chunks |
| **ex_blk_stream** | Stream | FnXML streaming with 64KB chunks |
| **saxy_string** | SAX | External, highly optimized callback parser |
| **saxy_stream** | SAX | External, streaming 64KB chunks |
| **erlsom** | SAX/DOM | External Erlang library, simple_form mode |
| **xmerl** | DOM | Erlang stdlib, full DOM tree |

---

## Parse Speed Comparison (Medium File - 249 KB)

| Parser | Speed (ips) | vs fast_ex_blk | Memory |
|--------|-------------|----------------|--------|
| **fast_ex_blk** | **565** | 1.00x | 2.02 MB |
| saxy_string | 351 | 1.61x slower | 3.89 MB |
| ex_blk_parser | 319 | 1.77x slower | 4.03 MB |
| saxy_stream | 284 | 1.99x slower | 4.03 MB |
| fast_ex_blk_stream | 252 | 2.24x slower | 1.86 MB |
| ex_blk_stream | 180 | 3.13x slower | 4.04 MB |
| erlsom | 154 | 3.67x slower | 17.98 MB |
| xmerl | 55 | 10.35x slower | 86.92 MB |

---

## Memory Usage Comparison (Medium File)

| Parser | Memory | vs fast_ex_blk |
|--------|--------|----------------|
| **fast_ex_blk_stream** | **1.86 MB** | 0.92x (lowest) |
| **fast_ex_blk** | **2.02 MB** | 1.00x |
| saxy_string | 3.89 MB | 1.92x more |
| ex_blk_parser | 4.03 MB | 1.99x more |
| saxy_stream | 4.03 MB | 1.99x more |
| ex_blk_stream | 4.04 MB | 2.00x more |
| erlsom | 17.98 MB | 8.88x more |
| xmerl | 86.92 MB | 42.94x more |

---

## Summary: FnXML vs Competition

| Metric | vs Saxy (string) | vs Saxy (stream) | vs erlsom | vs xmerl |
|--------|------------------|------------------|-----------|----------|
| **Speed** | 1.61x faster | 1.99x faster | 3.67x faster | 10.35x faster |
| **Memory** | 1.92x less | 1.99x less | 8.88x less | 42.94x less |

---

## Architecture

### CPS Recursive Descent Parser

```
XML Input -> Binary Pattern Match -> Emit Event -> Continue
             (single pass)          (accumulate)   (tail-call)
```

Key optimizations:
- **Continuation-passing style**: Tail-call optimized, minimal stack usage
- **Single binary reference**: Uses `binary_part/3` for zero-copy content extraction
- **Position tracking**: Integer offsets instead of creating sub-binary "rest"
- **Guard-based dispatch**: Character classes use guards for efficient branching
- **Mini-block streaming**: Elements spanning chunk boundaries handled efficiently

### Why FnXML is Fast

1. **Zero-copy parsing**: Content extracted via `binary_part/3` references original binary
2. **No intermediate AST**: Events emitted directly without building tree structure
3. **Minimal allocations**: Only event tuples are allocated during parsing
4. **Tail-call optimization**: CPS enables true tail recursion throughout
5. **BEAM-optimized patterns**: Multi-byte patterns like `<!--` matched directly

---

## When to Use Each Parser

| Use Case | Recommended |
|----------|-------------|
| Maximum speed, full document | `FnXML.Legacy.FastExBlkParser.parse(xml)` |
| Minimum memory, large files | `FnXML.Legacy.FastExBlkParser.stream(chunks)` |
| Standard parsing (Edition 5) | `FnXML.Parser.parse(xml)` |
| File streaming | `File.stream!(path, [], 65536) \|> FnXML.Parser.parse()` |

---

## Running Benchmarks

```bash
# Quick benchmark (medium file only)
mix run bench/parse_bench.exs --quick

# Full benchmark (all file sizes)
mix run bench/parse_bench.exs

# Comprehensive comparison (all parsers including legacy)
mix run bench/all_parsers_bench.exs

# By file size
mix run bench/all_parsers_bench.exs --by-size

# Edition 5 variants only
mix run bench/all_parsers_bench.exs --ed5
```

**Note**: The benchmarks compare FnXML's macro-based parser (Edition 4 and Edition 5 variants) against legacy implementations and external libraries.

## Regenerating Test Data

```bash
mix run bench/generate_data.exs
```
